EDAM: Classifying Invasive Species

Problem Statement
Invasive species are defined as non-native species, whose introduction to an ecosystem can cause economic or environmental harm [1]. As such, their presence heavily impacts ecosystems and native species. Every year, non-indigenous species cause over $120 billion in environmental damages and losses in the United States alone. In addition, 42% of the species on the threatened or endangered species lists are threatened primarily due to invasive species [2]. The problem will only be exacerbated as the world continues to globalize - increasing rates of human population growth, movement of goods and people, and alteration of the environment will spread species with greater efficiency, making them potential invasive species. Therefore, rapid and accurate classification of invasive species is needed more than ever to identify and limit further damage.

However, there is currently no easy way to identify invasive species aside from experts manually classifying each species in an ecosystem. Ecologists have large amounts of species data but no way to use it to classify invasive species efficiently. Many projects seek to model ecosystems to gain a better understanding of species interactions and environments, but invasive species are a key point that hinders modeling. In order to address the problem of classifying invasive species, we propose a method to use machine learning to train models on species data in order to better understand the impact of invasive species on ecosystems and speed up the classification process. 

The challenges with building a general classification model is that every group of organisms could possess different traits that would make them invasive. Much of the work on modeling invasive species focuses on specific groups of organisms, limiting the scope of their applicability. By examining the features that different groups have analyzed, we plan to identify general features that can be mapped to different species groups to allow for broad yet accurate classification of invasive species.

Existing Solutions
There have been several efforts to use data driven approaches to identify invasive species. However, they are primarily focused on one group of organisms, and they utilize very specific features for the classification, limiting the generalizability of the classification methods. 

For instance, Philibert et al. studied the invasiveness of pathogenic fungi. They used Random Forest to predict invasiveness based on long-distance dispersal, reproduction, spore shape and size, number of cells in spores, and optimal temperature for growth [3]. Similarly Chen et al. tested several modeling methods - CART, MARS, Random Forest, Logistic Regression, and LDA - to predict the invasiveness of plants based on biogeographical variables (plant distribution), origin variables (continent of origin), and life history variables, including height, reproduction, fruit type, seed weight, etc. [4]. These two works both seek to identify invasive species based on traits, but they are focused on a specific group of organisms, which is not helpful in generalizing classification methods to other species. Our goal is to use organism traits to develop a general model for classification, allowing for researchers of many different species to use the same general framework in rapid identification. While Keller et al. did something similar in training a model for various taxonomic groups, they had to train a separate model for each group rather than a single model for all groups [5]. We want to use common traits shared by multiple organism groups as the sole basis of our classification. 

Moreover, aside from merely classifying invasive species, by identifying the critical traits linked with invasiveness, we can cluster organisms based on these traits even if there is no training set of labelled invasive species. Performing clustering makes the task of expert identification much simpler, since there is would only be a few clusters to examine rather than the numerous species comprising each cluster. In these ways, we hope to study existing works and expand on their solutions.

Proposed Innovation
We propose a method to use machine learning models to identify features that can define invasive species. These features should be shared across multiple organism groups so that they can be combined with a prediction model to allow for quick classification of invasive species, removing the bottleneck of expert analysis.

Our first goal is to gather a list of features for various organism groups by studying various works. These features should be able to consistently identify invasive species using a standard prediction model. Once we have validated features for different groups, we plan to generalize the features and test various feature subsets in order to select the critical features, which can be mapped across multiple organism groups. For instance, seed dispersal in plants could be comparable to reproductive rate in lizards. While the mapped features will lose precision, they gain the benefit of generalizability. 

Our second goal is to test unsupervised clustering methods using the selected list of features. Prediction models require a training set, or a labelled dataset that experts have already classified. However, this data is not available for all species/region data. To address this issue, we want to be able to cluster organisms accurately, allowing experts to classify invasiveness by clusters of species instead of one at a time. This solution speeds up the classification process significantly despite not being able to automatically classify invasive species directly. 

These two solutions differ from existing solutions in that our classification models will be applicable to various organism groups and will be able to produce results even without training data. Both proposals help to reduce the amount of expert involvement in invasive species classification, allowing experts to spend more time in how to handle the species rather than finding them. Essentially, we automate a large chunk of the study of invasive species, thereby removing a significant bottleneck in the field.

This project will progress iteratively, as we develop models with available and use those models to acquire more data from researchers. We are currently testing prediction models on a database of Pacific plants available online, and with the results from those experiments, we can request data from researchers. For instance, we previously worked with researchers from the Gump research station on Moorea to classify a list of hexapods, which we plan to test our models on. As we get more datasets to work with, our models will become increasingly accurate and generalizable.

Certain implementation challenges we may encounter are data acquisition and model fitting problems. Regarding the data we are working with, we have already discussed our plans for iterative data acquisition. We are also in contact with data librarians and ecological researchers at UC Berkeley, who we can work with to fill missing data. Regarding modeling challenges, we have already seen that there are features in many organism groups that can be used to identify invasive species based on previous works. Based on initial analysis, we have also concluded that these features can be mapped across multiple organism groups. Should this generalization process cause a significant loss in accuracy, we would try to extract more features from the data or keep some organism specific features to support our general prediction models. 

Team Bios
The members of this team are all talented students studying computer science and have various amounts of experience with data analysis and research. They are all able to respond to problems quickly and are interested in applying their machine learning knowledge to practical problems.

Jonathan Wang is a senior undergraduate student studying Computer Science and Statistics. He has had experience with data analysis and developing web apps. Jonathan is working as the project manager of this project, selecting datasets and models to work with as well as maintaining the overall direction of the project.

Brian Lin is a junior undergraduate student studying Computer Science and Statistics with an interest in Economics. He is mainly interested in applying machine learning and data science to solving real life problems. 

Jack Ye is a junior undergraduate student studying Computer Science and Statistics. His main academic interest is in machine learning and deep learning, especially for building automated data analysis platforms. Apart from BIDS, he is currently working in the Berkeley ICSI multimedia team for research about music information retrieval.

Lavanya Harinarayan is a senior undergraduate student studying Computer Science. She is interested in exploring the various applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence, especially in the field of security.

Caleb Siu is a sophomore undergraduate student studying Computer Science and Economics. He is mainly interested in exploring more of computer science, including machine learning and web development for the current semester. In addition, he is the Director of Finance for Society of Asian Americans and Engineers at Berkeley and part of a college ministry. 

Justin Mi is a freshman undergraduate student studying Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. He is passionate about learning anything and everything in computer science, with a particular emphasis in machine learning and AI. Outside of BIDS, Justin is actively involved in Robotics@Berkeley and Phi Beta Lambda.


References

[1] Invasive Species Advisory Committee. “Invasive Species Definition Clarification and Guidance White Paper,” April 2006.

[2] David Pimentel, Rodolfo Zuniga, Doug Morrison. "Update on the environmental and economic costs associated with alien-invasive species in the United States." Ecological Economics, vol. 52, 2005.

[3] Aurore Philibert, Marie-Laure Desprez-Loustau, Benedicte Fabre, Pascal Frey, Fabien Halkett, Claude Husson, Brigitte Lung-Escarmant, Benoit Marcais, Cecile Robin, Corinne Vacher, David Makowski. “Prediction invasion success of forest pathogenic fungi from species traits.” Journal of Applied Ecology, vol. 48, 2011.

[4] Leiyi Chen, Shaolin Peng, and Bin Yang. “Predicting alien herb invasion with machine learning models: biogeographical and life-history traits both matter.” Biological Invasions, March 2015.

[5] Reuben P. Keller, Dragi Kocev, Saso Dzeroski. “Trait-based risk assessment for invasive species: high performance across diverse taxonomic groups, geographic ranges and machine learning/statistical tools.” Diversity and Distributions, 2011.



